Add blog post about recording seccomp profiles in edge scenarios (#40486)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-04-06-seccomp-profiles-edge.md

the recent development efforts of the SPO and makes it excitingly easy to play
around with seccomp profiles.

[spo]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator

## Recording seccomp profiles with `spoc record`

The [latest release][spo-latest] of the Security Profiles Operator ships a new
command line interface called `spoc`, which is a little helper tool for
recording and replaying seccomp profiles among various other things which are
out of scope of this blog post.

[spo-latest]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/releases/latest

Recording a seccomp profile requires a binary to be executed, which can be a
simple golang application which just calls [`uname(2)`][uname]:

```go
package main

import (
	"syscall"
)

func main() {
	utsname := syscall.Utsname{}
	if err := syscall.Uname(&utsname); err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
}
```

[uname]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/uname.2.html

Building a statically linked binary from that code can be done by:

```console
> go build -o main main.go
> ldd ./main
        not a dynamic executable
```

Now we can download the latest binary of [`spoc` from GitHub][spoc-latest] and

> run the application with it:

Reviewer: Do you think it's worth mentioning that this is a Linux-only tool?

Author: Yes, added that note.

10:08:25.616293 Wrote seccomp profile to: /tmp/profile.yaml
10:08:25.616298 Unloading bpf module
```

We have to execute `spoc` as root because it will internally run an [ebpf][ebpf]
program by reusing the same code parts from the Security Profiles Operator
itself. We can see that the bpf module got loaded successfully and `spoc`
attached the required tracepoint to it. Then it will track the main application
by using its [mount namespace][mntns] and process the recorded syscall data.

[ebpf]: https://ebpf.io
[mntns]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/mount_namespaces.7.html

The logs indicate that `spoc` found the syscalls `read`, `close`,
`mmap` and so on, including `uname`. The other syscalls are coming from the

> golang runtime and its garbage collection, which already adds overhead to a

Reviewer: I think you meant here "the other syscalls than uname that our application is calling" right?

Author: Yes, fixed.

basic application like in our demo. We can also see from the logs that `spoc`

> adds a bunch of base syscalls to the resulting profile. Those are inherited by

Reviewer: it might be worth saying explicitly that this is the line that starts with "Adding base syscalls"

Author: Yep, done.

the OCI runtime (like [runc][runc] or [crun][crun]) syscalls for being able to

> run a container. This means that `spoc` can be used to record seccomp profiles

Reviewer: used by the OCI runtime in order to be able to run a container?

Author: Make sense, changed as suggested.

which then can be containerized directly. This behavior can be disabled in
`spoc` by using the `--no-base-syscalls`/`-n` or customized via the

> `--base-syscalls`/`-b` command line flags.

Reviewer: do you think it's worth pointing out why would someone use this flag? I assume it's when they use a different kind of a base runtime or a different version?

Author: Yep, done :+1:

ever. Recording those profiles from scratch is one of the key features of this
operator, which usually involves the integration into large CI/CD systems. Being
able to test the recording capabilities of the operator in edge cases is one of
the recent development efforts of the SPO and makes it excitingly easy to play
around with seccomp profiles.

[spo]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator

## Recording seccomp profiles with `spoc record`

The [latest release][spo-latest] of the Security Profiles Operator ships a new
command line interface called `spoc`, which is a little helper tool for
recording and replaying seccomp profiles among various other things which are
out of scope of this blog post.

[spo-latest]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/releases/latest

Recording a seccomp profile requires a binary to be executed, which can be a
simple golang application which just calls [`uname(2)`][uname]:

```go
package main

import (
	"syscall"
)

func main() {
	utsname := syscall.Utsname{}
	if err := syscall.Uname(&utsname); err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
}
```

[uname]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/uname.2.html

> Building a statically linked binary from that code can be done by:

Reviewer 2: Could you specify why is it important to be statically linked?

Author: I removed that part, it's not important that the binary is statically linked, just a standard golang behavior.

10:08:25.615195 Adding base syscalls: access, brk, capget, capset, chdir, chmod, chown, close_range, dup2, dup3, epoll_create1, epoll_ctl, epoll_pwait, execve, faccessat2, fchdir, fchmodat, fchown, fchownat, fcntl, fstat, fstatfs, getdents64, getegid, geteuid, getgid, getpid, getppid, getuid, ioctl, keyctl, lseek, mkdirat, mknodat, mount, mprotect, munmap, newfstatat, openat2, pipe2, pivot_root, prctl, pread64, pselect6, readlink, readlinkat, rt_sigreturn, sched_yield, seccomp, set_robust_list, set_tid_address, setgid, setgroups, sethostname, setns, setresgid, setresuid, setsid, setuid, statfs, statx, symlinkat, tgkill, umask, umount2, unlinkat, unshare, write
10:08:25.616293 Wrote seccomp profile to: /tmp/profile.yaml
10:08:25.616298 Unloading bpf module
```

We have to execute `spoc` as root because it will internally run an [ebpf][ebpf]
program by reusing the same code parts from the Security Profiles Operator
itself. We can see that the bpf module got loaded successfully and `spoc`
attached the required tracepoint to it. Then it will track the main application

> by using its [mount namespace][mntns] and process the recorded syscall data.

Reviewer 2: Will the spoc just monitor and track the syscalls (like ldd) or it will directly execute them?

Author: It will track the syscalls and let them execute, there is no interference between the recording and the execution.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this a security issue?

Author: It can be, yes. I mentioned that spoc sees all system syscalls but only tracks them without any interference.

users when it comes to debugging seccomp profiles.

[enricher]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/blob/35ebdda/installation-usage.md#using-the-log-enricher

Now I have to modify the profile to see anything valuable in the output. For
example, I could remove the allowed `uname` syscall:

```console
> jq 'del(.syscalls[0].names[] | select(. == "uname"))' /tmp/profile.json > /tmp/no-uname-profile.json
```

And then try to run it again with the new profile `/tmp/no-uname-profile.json`:

```
> sudo ./spoc run -p /tmp/no-uname-profile.json ./main
10:39:12.707798 Reading file /tmp/no-uname-profile.json
10:39:12.707892 Setting up seccomp
10:39:12.707920 Load seccomp profile
10:39:12.707982 Starting audit log enricher
10:39:12.707998 Enricher reading from file /var/log/audit/audit.log
10:39:12.709164 Running command with PID: 480512
panic: operation not permitted

goroutine 1 [running]:
main.main()
        /path/to/main.go:10 +0x85
10:39:12.713035 Unable to run: launch runner: wait for command: exit status 2
```

Alright, that was expected! The applied seccomp profile blocks the `uname`
syscall, which results in an "operation not permitted" error. This error is

> pretty generous and does not provide any hint that it got blocked by seccomp.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
pretty generic and does not provide any hint on what got blocked by seccomp.
```

Author: Fixed as suggested :+1:

terminates like in our simple demo, but it could also lead to a strange
misbehavior and the application does not stop at all.

If I now change the default seccomp action of the profile from `SCMP_ACT_ERRNO`
to `SCMP_ACT_LOG` like this:

```console
> jq '.defaultAction = "SCMP_ACT_LOG"' /tmp/no-uname-profile.json > /tmp/no-uname-profile-log.json
```

Then the log enricher will give us a hint that the `uname` syscall got blocked
when using `spoc run`:

```
> sudo ./spoc run -p /tmp/no-uname-profile-log.json ./main
10:48:07.470126 Reading file /tmp/no-uname-profile-log.json
10:48:07.470234 Setting up seccomp
10:48:07.470245 Load seccomp profile
10:48:07.470302 Starting audit log enricher
10:48:07.470339 Enricher reading from file /var/log/audit/audit.log
10:48:07.470889 Running command with PID: 522268
10:48:07.472007 Seccomp: uname (63)
```

The application will not terminate any more, but seccomp will log the behavior
to `/var/log/audit/audit.log` and `spoc` will parse the data to correlate it
directly to our program. Generating the log messages to the audit subsystem
comes with a large performance overhead and should be handled with care in

> production systems.

Reviewer 3: It may be worth calling out the security risks of running untrusted apps in audit mode in production environments.

Author: Yep, mentioned that as well.

---
layout: blog
title: "Having fun with seccomp profiles on the edge"
date: 2023-04-06
slug: seccomp-profiles-edge
---

**Author**: Sascha Grunert

> The [Security Profiles Operator (SPO)][spo] is a feature-rich operator for

Reviewer 4: Could link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/ if you'd like to.

Author: Done

Kubernetes to make managing seccomp, SELinux and AppArmor profiles easier than
ever. Recording those profiles from scratch is one of the key features of this
operator, which usually involves the integration into large CI/CD systems. Being
able to test the recording capabilities of the operator in edge cases is one of
the recent development efforts of the SPO and makes it excitingly easy to play
around with seccomp profiles.

[spo]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator

## Recording seccomp profiles with `spoc record`

> The [latest release][spo-latest] of the Security Profiles Operator ships a new
> command line interface called `spoc`, which is a little helper tool for
> recording and replaying seccomp profiles among various other things which are
> out of scope of this blog post.
> 
> [spo-latest]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/releases/latest

Reviewer 4: Most important change is to be specific about which release, as https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/releases/latest is not a permalink.

Is this right?
```suggestion
The [v0.7.1](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/releases/tag/v0.7.1)
of the Security Profiles Operator shipped a new command line interface called `spoc`, a little
helper tool for recording and replaying seccomp profiles amongst various other things that
are out of scope of this blog post.
```

Author: :+1:

Recording a seccomp profile requires a binary to be executed, which can be a
simple golang application which just calls [`uname(2)`][uname]:

```go
package main

import (
	"syscall"
)

func main() {
	utsname := syscall.Utsname{}
	if err := syscall.Uname(&utsname); err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
}
```

[uname]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/uname.2.html

Building a binary from that code can be done by:

```console
> go build -o main main.go
> ldd ./main
        not a dynamic executable
```

Now it's possible to download the latest binary of [`spoc` from
GitHub][spoc-latest] and run the application on Linux with it:

> [spoc-latest]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator/releases/download/v0.7.1/spoc.amd64

Reviewer 4: Avoid “latest” if you can.

10:48:07.470245 Load seccomp profile
10:48:07.470302 Starting audit log enricher
10:48:07.470339 Enricher reading from file /var/log/audit/audit.log
10:48:07.470889 Running command with PID: 522268
10:48:07.472007 Seccomp: uname (63)
```

The application will not terminate any more, but seccomp will log the behavior
to `/var/log/audit/audit.log` and `spoc` will parse the data to correlate it
directly to our program. Generating the log messages to the audit subsystem
comes with a large performance overhead and should be handled with care in
production systems. It also comes with a security risk when running untrusted
apps in audit mode in production environments.

This demo should give you an impression how to debug seccomp profile issues with
applications, probably by using our shiny new helper tool powered by the
features of the Security Profiles Operator. `spoc` is a flexible and portable
binary suitable for edge cases where resources are limited and even Kubernetes
itself may not be available with its full capabilities.

Thank you for reading this blog post! If you're interested in more, providing
feedback or asking for help, then feel free to get in touch with us directly via

> [Slack (#security-profiles-operator)][slack] or [the mailing list][mail].

Reviewer 4: (nit)
```suggestion
[Slack (#security-profiles-operator)][slack] or the [mailing list][mail].
```

Author: Fixed
